you know you think of weight you think
of food but
it's very possible that even things like
light might be having a
a very large input here well you can
then look at epidemiological research
and shows that people that chronically
get less sleep are much more likely to
develop diabetes we used to think that
poor sleep was just a very common and
early symptom of alzheimer's disease but
we now know that it might actually be
directly involved in its pathogenesis
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dan pardee he's a sleep
researcher at stanford who received his
doctorate from laden university one of
the oldest and most prestigious
universities in the world he's got a
very holistic approach to wellness and
his areas of expertise include sleep
optimizing cognitive performance and
high performance in general as well as
the role of diet exercise and fasting on
our overall health and well-being
additionally he's the ceo of human os a
company aimed at giving people an
optimized operating system for healthy
living
now the place i want to start this whole
idea of the os for healthy living is
really interesting to me but the thing
i'm most fascinated by is that it
started with your dad's battle for
cancer yeah so walk us through that
how did that inform what you're doing
now yeah that's a um it's one of the
points
that caused a refocusing re-motivation
and dedication to this field of health
at the time i was doing research with uh
somebody named dean ornish who is
looking at a multi-factorial lifestyle
program so
all different aspects of lifestyle and
how that if brought together could
affect the progression of prostate
cancer
my dad was then diagnosed
with cancer so i thought i'm in a unique
position to help him a bit and so what i
would do is go and just give him all
sorts of information and it was
overwhelming to him and he wasn't able
to then make change
that i thought could uh affect his
condition
i when he didn't make the change i'd get
frustrated and when he passed away it
really made me think about if i'm in
this field wanting to actually influence
how people live in their health
you need to understand behavior you need
to understand what is going to help
somebody
pick up some of this knowledge that's
out there and make it a part of their
life
so that was one of those aha moments and
then from there i dedicated some serious
time to understanding behavior
created a model called the loop model to
sustain health behaviors
and that was really the basis of human
os
did you read the book change or die
i haven't
so the the concept is pretty
straightforward you tell people to
change and most people don't so even if
the outcome is hey if you don't take
this pill and i think it was that simple
it's like you have to take a pill once a
day every day and compliance after like
three months or something drops to like
five percent yeah which is crazy but
what i love is that you didn't hit that
and go oh well that's just the thing you
dive into human behavior what did you
learn in that discovery process about
human behavior what's working against us
how do we begin to take hold of it
and then maybe most interestingly what
is the loop method sure
the idea is in order for somebody to
adopt and sustain a health behavior for
a long term not just a 30-day trial or
60-day period so this becomes a part of
their pattern of living
they should know why they are doing
something
how to do it
if they're doing it and if it's working
and you can see that each one of those
four components independently will
reinforce somebody's ability to pick
something up and take and go with it
so oftentimes what you'll see is that if
somebody doesn't let's say change their
behavior when information is given to
them you might just lob more information
provisions at them right oh there's more
information but maybe they just didn't
have the skills to implement that good
idea or they tried it for a little bit
and then their old behaviors were swept
back up they didn't have any feedback to
say this is actually are you living in
accordance with your own goals or maybe
they just didn't know if it was actually
working or not and because one
you know insidiously challenging aspect
of our health is that a lot of things
that are good for us
might be what i call the meaningful but
invisible
they matter but we don't get that
feedback to make us immediately detect
if it's having a presence and it might
be right you might have a significant
improvement in let's say memory
performance over a 12-week period but
year but you might not recognize it by
the time you get there it might actually
feel like you're just performing as
you've always been and that actually can
go up and down improvements and
decrements
so is there a way to then use technology
to then make people more informed about
things that can help them
more informed about their own patterns
of living and then empowered to put all
that into practice and i actually think
that we need technology in this world
to help us take care of our health well
i found this so interesting in some of
your talks define health yes
so that question was posed to me a while
ago
and i totally stumbled on it it's one of
those broad questions
that
is hard to define i think probably the
explanation that i like the most is that
it is the ability to maintain balance or
homeostasis within the body
so if you are challenged by some sort of
you know infection or arm break your
ability to get back to a place of
balance is a marker of health but it is
also more than that it is it is
something that can we can use as a
currency
to realize our goals and aspirations in
our life and i think if you take that if
you drink that in and you believe it
then all these things that can feel like
friction
might actually
just be opportunities to live in accord
to the fullest version of yourself
i love that definition so now let's say
that i have that but i'm still
struggling to implement what are the
behaviors
and like what are the behavior
modification tools that people can put
in place to comply i think the first
aspect of this is to clearly understand
the problem at hand
right if you don't really know what your
your challenge is
your
own efforts will be either inefficient
or you won't really know if you're
headed in the right direction even
though you're spinning your wheels we're
born into a time where the default
settings around us and the expectations
of our environment the pressures of
culture and work
and even the built environment will
predictably lead to issues with our
health chronic disease
we have to be a little bit weird we have
to make a daily effort to counteract
those forces to affect our pattern of
living so that
we actually are being good stewards of
our health it's not something that is
just there until it's gone it's
something that you need to cultivate and
nurture
the next you want to be a lifetime
learner because 15 20 years ago
circadian rhythms the gut microbiota
things like that were not a part of any
model that was used to predict or
describe health
we know information is changing
regularly so i love that saying um
have strong opinions held loosely
which means to me
that you take the time to form an
understanding now but you don't defend
that at all in the face of new
information so you need to have the
ability to upgrade that to up level that
and then you have to have be able to
take big concepts that you learn about
and personalize it into the fabric of
your life your family your kids whatever
that is how can you take this idea that
you think is going to benefit you and
make it real for you
because if it's too if it there's too
much friction and conflict you don't
personalize it you follow rules you
might be able to do that for two weeks
three weeks but then you'll you're
really likely to go back to
whatever patterns you had previously
what else i think your response to
failure right failure is a part of the
process a regular part of the process
can you address failure with compassion
for yourself and also with resilience
where you're like what can i learn about
the fact that i wanted to go to the gym
four times this week but i went twice
what was it about the week constant
assessment
to then just
know how you can do better next week
it's so interesting that as you're
talking about how to get people to
comply with health stuff that you're
talking about mindset in the beginning
so when i first started this
film uh everything journey and talk
through all these problems it was why is
the protein bar guy talking about
mindset yeah and then when i exited
quest and started impact theory and did
all this mindset stuff and then i said
guys we're gonna do a show called health
theory everyone's like why is the
mindset guy talking about health and
it's been like this constant frustration
for me for people to understand if you
want to optimize for your health you
have to optimize your mindset if you
want to optimize for your mindset you
have to take care of your health yeah
and because i talk a lot about working
hard and busting ass and all that and
what greatness demands people think that
i don't sleep they think that i just
grind my way to success
the reality is that if and you've talked
really powerfully about this if you want
to even have good decision-making
abilities yeah you've got to sleep run
us through like a sleep 101 why it's so
foundational to your work and what
people should be doing yeah i left a
company that i loved at a job that i
loved to start a startup and my phd
and i thought it could
all implode it would be too much for me
to handle
and so i thought if i'm going to
upregulate my ability to show up every
day
i need to then
basically take care of the machinery
that is doing the work
so
what is it that makes me feel sharp
every day and sleep then is of course
one component of that
and
what i've realized it's so it's funny we
kind of encapsulate sleep as it's this
packaged thing but it's almost like tell
me about daytime right that's a big
window you know and what sleep ends up
being is a very great window into your
soul you know even into the into the
workings of the brain and how
like what is happening physiologically
so you really understand
um it gives you a window to like narrow
the field a little bit to then
understand how our physiology works in
general if you had to make a hypothesis
about two or three reasons why we sleep
what do you think are the two or three
most important things that happen while
people are sleeping yeah it's a good
question because it's been almost like
definition of health
under what is the solitary unitary
purpose of sleep has been notably hard
to define we know very important things
can happen it's purging of energetic
byproducts it's purging of potentially
neurotoxic products that are a result of
that it is plasticity that's forming it
is re-regulation of our immune system
there's a lot going on
and i there has not yet been one i think
model that explains everything but we do
know that incredibly important things
occur so what are people doing that
messes up their sleep yeah so that's a
it's a really good question and the
the common question that you get is how
much loop do you need right how much
time should i be in bed
it's easy but the things that matter for
sleep are timing intensity and duration
so duration is sort of the easy one it's
that what i tell people is spend enough
time in bed so that you wake naturally
that means you're not waking by an alarm
and so what i like to get what i call
complete sleep is
aim to spend half an hour more in bed
than what you think you'll need so that
if your body needs it on that night
you'll get it
no you might not ever need it or you
might not need it or you might need it
rarely but allow for complete sleep to
happen
you also want the timing of your sleep
to
be regular so if for instance you
go to bed usually from midnight and wake
up at eight but tonight you go to bed at
4am and you wake up at noon it's 8 hours
but the sleep will not be as restorative
as it was if you were sleeping in that
same window every night because we now
are introducing the concept of circadian
rhythms which are repeatable 24 hour
processes so when you're getting rem
sleep at 4 00
your body because of your past
experience over the last several weeks
knows do rem-like activities at that
time and so it'll be more efficient
sleep itself will be more efficient at
doing what it wants to do if you
regularize the timing of your sleep
and then you have intensity and that is
really not something that you can take
action on directly right go sleep hard
yeah come on do it but you can do things
during the day that then will facilitate
depth and you can also create an
environment that is less disruptive okay
so talk to me what can i do during the
day to make sure that i'm sleeping hard
yeah so if you look at people that
undergo bed rest because they have a
broken leg or in studies that put people
on under bed rest to then see what their
sleep is like you know they end up
having a fragmentation of their sleep so
they have more naps during the day
and they have more periods at night
where they are up without adequate
amounts of physical activity there is a
fragmentation of your sleep you don't
need a ton
to then get better sleep but then where
does that sensitivity just sort of drop
off you
use running as an example because we can
just define it by time you go regularly
for a 20-minute run today you go for a
four-hour run
you've now overloaded your system to a
degree that might actually impair the
amount of sleep that you get there's a
bidirectional relationship there where a
little bit of the stimulus aids in the
depth of sleep and too much can
overwhelm it now it doesn't
automatically mean you will sleep poorly
but you have a higher risk of doing so
you might sleep like a rock
and then there's temperature
fluctuations so this is actually a newer
area but
we live in a very insulated world right
even if we go outside and there's not
much variation in the temperature we can
layer ourselves so that our what we're
being exposed to is very narrow
we also know that signals from
a wider breadth of temperature within
the day
might actually feed into that what's
called the homeostat these things that
are collecting the signals of daytime
usage that then help you sleep deeply
and then a big important one is light so
light coming into your eye
will communicate with receptors at the
back of the eye that are not
actually communicating with the visual
cortex that help us see but are
communicating with the master clock
and it we spend 90 of our time indoors
now so if
we are not getting
as much light as we used to so if you go
outside don't wear glasses
get outside for at least a half an hour
sunglasses sunglasses yes yeah thanks
and then in the evening you really just
want to have whatever internal and light
environment is reflect what's going on
outside so as the sun goes down dim the
lights
uh and then also change the tone so
you're getting less blue light because
that is the blue is the major signal to
these retinal ganglion cells that says
to the master clock it's daytime yeah
speaking of which yeah i was listening
to one of your talks and you talk about
how the fact the fact that fat
has photoreceptors or light receptors
how is it possible probably like one of
the coolest discoveries of last year
but
those same receptors
that are in the back of our eye they're
called opsin receptors and all opsin
receptors and there are many over 100
they have the ability to transduce a
light signal
into a nerve signal of some sort so
peter light in alberta researcher
professor peter light you have to be
joking
i know isn't that i mean he's that is
that's hilarious yeah i rolled right
over that one yeah peter light who
studies light
uh i don't think there was a name change
there i think that's his given name
he did a screen to see are these
receptors anywhere else in the body and
he's found them in fat tissue wow and
he's like this has to be an artifact
this can't be
this can't be a thing
and so he was able to test if
light
hitting fat tissue had an effect
and he
put his hand over the light and the
signal went away he took his hand away
from the light and the signal reappeared
so we thought wow this there's something
here and that made him investigate it
more thoroughly and what he found is
that fat tissue
has light receptors the same ones in our
eye and they respond to light and it
makes the fat cells shrink
become less inflammatory
and they release a whole different uh
profile of hormones
and
we might actually have a light
deficiency not just for vitamin d but
for our regulation of fat
the conversation around fats regulation
is oftentimes fairly uninformed we
regulate fat tissue like we do
temperature it is it is something that
is not simply just a matter of did we
you know the calories and calories out
your body is making a lot of adjustments
now those calories do matter but it is
making a ton of adjustments
to those calories to then say do i want
that fat storage to shrink or to expand
and you and it's trying to regulate it
similar to how a thermostat would
regulate
uh temperature in a hole you said it at
72.
this is super interesting so we can say
that the fat in our body works as a
gland is that fair yeah you could say
that it's a yeah but
is there logic to like the the
hypothalamus that um thermostat you've
talked about fat trying to stay in a
range
um that it goes up and down sort of
regularly
but it stays in that type end like this
is so interesting to think of it as
uh secreting hormones and being a gland
walk us through the details of that
yeah so we now know that
fat releases i think over 50 different
what are called adipocytes adipo fat
kinds like a cytokine which is like a
hormone and so
as
triglycerides enter into our fat tissue
then leptin is produced continuously so
that flux of
fats fat tissue fat leaving and entering
the fat tissue
will then cause
leptin be to be made proportional to
that
then that signal goes into the blood and
there's various receptors for it so one
in the brain in the brain stem
you actually have them on your pancreas
as well but then in the hypothalamus
so the brain is then detecting
how much fat is circulating ah you've
lost a little bit of weight
less fat storage less leptin release
be hungry get that fat stores back up
and you have neurons in the brain in the
hypothalamus and these and a lot of the
hypothalamic centers will connect so you
have these discrete groups of cells that
communicate with one another that then
affect things like motivation
temperature
uh even sleep
and so there's a balance of different
cell types within an area called the rq
nucleus and depending on the signals
that are present will then
initiate this cascading effects that
will affect hunger that'll affect energy
expenditure all to try to keep your fat
levels in a
constant level now it doesn't have to be
the exact same level but within a range
now why do we then get fatter it's
thought that this homeostat this fat
homeostat is much better at defending
weight loss than weight gain makes sense
evolutionarily that was probably much
more of a concern
and there's also some thinking that
those neurons actually get damaged by
our environment our internal environment
from the types of foods that we eat and
challenges to
them from even things like poor sleep
so
nutrient inadequacies things like that
all these things can affect the health
of that tissue and it's one of the
reasons why i am favorable towards a
ketogenic diet because
beta-hydroxybutyrate
is one of the ketones and it can cause
those those tissues within the brain to
actually start to remodel and regenerate
and so somebody that has diet induced
obesity
they they have a very hard time losing
weight because even if they lose weight
their body wants to get back to that set
point
and if you look at people that are on a
ketogenic diet for a lot of them they
just start eating to satiety they eat
normally and yet they the weight comes
off naturally
now there's no guarantee that that
weight will stay off but i think you put
yourself in a much better position you
know if you lose weight on
other ways not all other ways but other
ways
if you look at somebody's physiology
once they're 50 pounds lighter for a lot
of people it looks like their body's
desperately trying to get back up in
weight their brain will stay active
seeking food so if you do fmri and
there's food on the table they will stay
seeking even out even if they're full
right everything is engineered
all the different processes are
engineered to get you back up to that
weight what are some of those processes
that's so interesting like
so i i've had a lot of these symptoms um
so i used to be 60 pounds heavier i lost
that and i did it so stupidly you can't
imagine i did it in a rabbit starvation
diet and just insane amounts of cardio
so my calories were probably between
1200 and 1500 a day
as much as i could make it just pure
protein as possible
i was
inflamed it was crazy my joints hurt my
knees my wrists my elbows and moves
gnarly yeah but unfortunately i wasn't
thinking hey listen to your body i was
just thinking you're getting leaner
you're getting leaner you're getting
leaner but you want to talk about
seeking food at all times like all i
could think about was when my next meal
was but i never thought of that as like
anything other than well your calories
are crazy low but what are the
mechanisms that like trap people because
there are some people who will swear
that they can't no matter what they
can't lose weight yeah and i've always
if i'm honest i've always really
discounted the well it makes me hungrier
yeah
so interestingly
a ketogenic diet i'm very interested in
the mechanisms by which it might be
working and it and there the ketone beta
hydroxybutyrate might actually be
turning on genes that help to reset
those tissues that are controlling body
fat effectively lowering your set point
to a place that's healthier that's a
possibility the other diet that can do
that is very low energy diets that
actually have very low energy people's
starvation low calorie low calorie yeah
because you don't have to actually
be on a ketogenic diet to produce
ketones if you're in a state of fasting
or in hypochloric intake then you're
going to produce ketones too so give me
the order in which the body burns
calories and and include alcohol as
the fourth macro which some people will
say yes
so
preferentially the body will burn
glucose
uh and that is thought because the brain
is a very very glucose hungry it is only
four percent of our body weight and yet
it consumes 25 percent of the calories
we eat
it's a very metabo metabolically active
tissue do macros always go in an order
so here's what i heard this could be
total uh number one that if
there's alcohol in the system it will be
metabolized first yeah followed by
glucose it depends yeah so actually it
depends on your relative relative status
what
type of macros have you been eating over
the last couple of weeks and then what
enzymes have been generated in response
to that exposure okay so it's not like
there's some set it's always going to
burn them in this order see most studies
are always looking at what is under this
normal condition which is our standard
diet
it's not looking at under all conditions
and under things like fasting or what
might be evolutionarily more regular in
terms of like you know not having
breakfast until maybe noon
we have what's called metabolic
flexibility which is thought to be
something that is a good state to try to
achieve which means that you can readily
burn different types of fuel sources so
you know it's it's extraordinarily
complex
people give simple explanations for it
but
you know this is actually one of the
biggest public health needs in our world
because the amount of
comorbidities that associate with
obesity
it will bankrupt our society you know
you think of weight you think of food
but
it's very possible that even things like
light might be having
a
a very large input here and like like
sunlight even right we're talking about
that so if fat is a regulated tissue
and we are living fully clothed
um i wouldn't say that there's any
silver bullet but there's a lot of
different inputs and so i think overall
one sort of perspective of mine is to
try to live more naturally but in a way
that is actually going to work within
the modern world one thing you said that
i found so interesting is all right fats
are regulated tissue it is um creating
all these hormones it's responding to
the environment it actually has light
sensitivity which still freaks me out i
know and hey by the way boys and girls
you're staying inside all day you're
clothed up when you go outside guess
what signal you're giving your body it's
winter time guess what the body does in
winter it stores more fat yeah
i wanted to literally stop my research
at that point strip and run outside just
to like shred up a little bit yeah of
course is not going to work quite like
that yeah so you've got fat as a gland
as a regulated tissue
um
do i understand it correctly to say that
it's breaking something as you get obese
you're more likely to get more obese and
there's something that breaks that
because like when you look at people
their set point is riding with them as
they're getting heavier and heavier
which is already terrifying and then
it's also secreting things that make you
more hungry that delay your
where you're still searching for food
longer
one is all of that true like did i just
explain that accurately yes but we're
missing a very important part to the
model
which is that
it's not the only thing that explains
our food-seeking behavior
we also will eat food because it tastes
good right
independent of our hunger right we know
that where for instance
somebody you know you eat a full meal
and you're out and you're full
but your appetite is renewed when the
dessert cart is brought over and you're
like oh i could eat that yeah let's get
four of those
that is another driver of
food intake and we live in an
environment that is really designed for
over consumption
so it's very easy
to overeat in our world because the
palatability of food
is one that will then promote overeating
and it the design of food processed
foods it also will make you feel less
full per calorie so there's a delay
before you even feel fullness all right
we got to talk about that because you
showed a visual in one year talks it was
so powerful and i've been in this a long
time but for some reason that visual
really hit me but when you showed the
raspberry tart which is like a little
raspberry pie it looks so innocent and
delicious totally and then you showed
the equivalent amount of calories in
bowls of raspberries it was like seven
or eight bowls of raspberries it was
crazy that just like that actually is a
lot of work from barbara rolls um and
her book volumetrics which is it is
stunning when we think about that how we
condense
calories into modern food products and
that's what i want to talk about when
people say processed food what they're
talking about is making it
hyperpalatable so i want to overeat
anyway yeah and then secondarily it it
has a lot of calories per
physical volume yes
so our central nervous system
preferences are designed to detect and
prefer caloric density
so it is different than eating the the
tart versus the raspberries right we
have now the ability to design food
to make us want to seek it it's a very
disadvantaged environment but the good
news is that eating raspberries
is also perfectly satisfying but the
more of that highly palatable
calorically dense food that you eat the
more that it'll drive food-seeking
behavior
so there is a behavioral element to this
how it messes with your neural circuitry
what's going on mechanistically though
so is it is it through that mechanism
that it's um it triggers the release of
ghrelin instead of leptin like there's
so many different molecules that are at
play
metabolically you're right ghrelin is
released from what are called auxintic
cells within the gut and it's very low
after a meal and it'll rise and as it's
rising between your meals it makes you
hungry it's the only gut derived peptide
that actually promotes feeding versus
fullness leptin is this what's called a
tonic signal it's sort of operating in
the background we call it a fullness
signal it's not quite it's actually
setting the tone
of how full you'll even be from a meal
so if you have low leptin you'll
naturally be less sensitive to the
fullness signals of a meal so satiety
and long-term fat regulation will work
together
now independent of that you have this
brain circuitry that's going on that can
think of it almost like addiction to a
rewarding signal
the more exposure you get to it
that will then drive
seeking food-seeking behavior so you're
not really hungry and yet you're craving
a lot of people experience this in the
afternoon you're bored and you're like i
just want to eat something
right we know it in our lives we can
detect it instantaneously the easy
example is when you bring something that
is very calorically dense at the end of
a meal and you're full but you now want
to eat more it is not the homeostat that
is evaluating calories and fullness
that's saying oh you should eat more it
is pleasure and the pleasure that
derives from caloric density
well now let's really freak people out
yeah talk to me about the impact on um
willpower may be a cheesy way to say it
but
decision making if i slept poorly yes
what we see is that not only do hormones
change in response to getting inadequate
sleep
but our brain changes too so there's
something called the neuro-competitive
model of decision making which means
that if you look at that thing that
tastes delicious
this reward part of your brain will
light up first it'll it'll respond to it
before the executive control
self-control area kicks in to says yeah
you might love how that tastes
but it's not good for you
right so you can see
that competition taking place it happens
all the time that
process of looking at the donut that you
love but ordinarily don't want to eat
then that is biased towards
eat this now and it ends up creating a
behavior we call effort discounting you
then are much less likely to work at
this thing that ordinarily you totally
say i care about this so i'm going to
make an effort to just not have donuts
in my life and you're like you know
effort
tomorrow i'll just have it now and that
can actually translate to like whether
it's going to the gym or the food that
you eat
and people live in that in that state
where i i care 95 of the day i'm
thinking about eating well and in that
moment of hunger and potentially
compared with sleep loss you make a
decision that you're then disappointed
in yourself in and you've talked pretty
powerfully about like how much time do
you have to lose a night before you
start to see some of this declination
yeah
what i found is that reliably
people that miss out an hour or two of
sleep have impairments in vigilance as
you'd imagine so they're less
objectively alert the next day and they
feel sleepier so subjective alertness is
impaired too
and interestingly independently so i'll
tell you about the study because it's
quite cool i had people come in and what
i cared about was what they ate so we
created a baseline and they had by the
way eight different choices that range
from like clearly unhealthy
gummy bears to you know ostensibly
healthy right so things like
you know just cut apple slices or
something
and
what's another criticism i've had of
previous research is that the decisions
of the helpfulness of the food were made
by the investigators but everybody has
their own opinion about food
right if you think there's four
different types of decisions there's i
like it and it's healthy easy
right i don't like it and it's not
healthy easy
the two in the middle are the most
interesting
it's really healthy and i don't really
like it which is sort of characteristic
of health choices that we have to make
sometimes and the most interesting one
is i love it and it's totally not
healthy
right how do people respond to food that
they recognize is or they think this
isn't good for me but i love this
and what we saw
is that when people were subjectively
sleepy
they were much more likely to eat foods
that they rated as high like low health
so they were defecting from their own
personal health standards you could say
and now just to compound things
you've got all right you miss an hour or
two on sleep and now the sudden you're
leaning towards the things that you have
high like low health yeah but also
losing sleep makes you look at a blood
level like a pre-diabetic
and so you get this double whammy walk
us through that like what's going on
metabolically um when you don't get
enough sleep
yes so that is still being investigated
but it was one of the very first things
that was discovered in response to sleep
law so they did sleep sleep deprivation
studies found that healthy young
subjects ended up basically looking
diabetic after
either one night of total sleep
deprivation or a couple nights of
partial sleep restriction where you're
not getting as much sleep as your body
wants
what's going on there so then that
stimulated some more investigation into
that now maybe that is because of
altered circadian timing it was hard to
parse that because we know
melatonin a darkness hormone
will actually cause insulin resistance
you want it because over the course of
the night you don't want insulin taking
blood glucose out of the bloodstream and
storing it because then you'd go
hypoglycemic and you'd wake up
so rather the body
it's a it's this beautiful dance
when darkness falls melatonin is
released melatonin travels to the
pancreas and it prevents insulin from
being released and you keep blood
glucose levels stable at the across the
night
so
i think when some people that are waking
up in the morning they're looking
diabetic they might still have high
levels of melatonin at night from the
night we also see that our fat tissue
simply becomes
less sensitive to the effects of insulin
and so it's just not reading the signal
of insulin and helping it to store
glucose as well and so therefore
blood glucose levels elevate and then
you know whether or not that is
pathogenic like does that cause diabetes
well you can then look at
epidemiological research and shows that
people that chronically get less sleep
are much more likely to develop diabetes
so you have to look at acutely what's a
mechanism and then epidemiologically
what happens when people generally do
this and then you have to just try to
figure out what's going on in between
but
clearly there's an issue going on there
and there's no part of the body that
goes untouched
when we don't sleep get the sleep that
we need
all right so if i want to get into rad
shape i know that i need to sleep i know
that i need to
both get the right kind of light
exposure at the right time
and i need to um watch my
cognitive impact on what i choose for
food and then just overall what i choose
for food what's the role of of exercise
um you've talked about how exercise may
um like on the surface it has some
counterintuitive impact on weight loss
which i thought was pretty interesting
yeah it makes sense if you're burning
more calories you'll just lose weight
and for a lot of people that actually
feels true um
probably 12 years ago at the society for
neuroscience meeting i saw a very
interesting abstract or poster where it
was six months of
chronic which that kind of sounds bad
but regular exercise so three to five
times a week at least 50 minutes
and what they were looking at actually
was the brain and the brain's ability to
make
um to have willpower essentially
and what they found is that your ability
to
kind of traverse the world rife with
many bad options for us becomes
strengthened
when we exercise regularly you have
stronger willpower when you exercise
regularly
and we know that to be true
do we know what the mechanism is yes so
there's a couple different mechanisms so
one of the mechanisms is acute and it
has to do with blood flow to the brain
and when you exercise regularly the
signals that are generated by the
demands of
creating blood flow throughout our body
end up supporting
more blood flow access throughout your
body so you can perfuse your tissues
more easily including the brain
exercise that's at sufficient intensity
so at least 80 percent most studies show
so 80 and 80 of max effort
will then
stimulate uh in a variety of ways
something called brain derived
neurotrophic factor
and this is essentially a
fertilizer to grow new neurons so yeah
it helps us with weight loss but in a
way that is not quite
what we expect it's not just through
energy expenditure but it is through the
signals that
are generated from exercise that then
keep our body functioning well there
also might be some bimodality here where
certain amounts of exercise generate
more hunger but it's not exceeded by
what you actually take in and that has a
lot to do with individual susceptibility
like there's what are different types of
eating patterns too some people are
uncontrolled eaters so once they start
they just keep going some people are
really good at just stopping when
they're full they'll leave food on their
plate i don't understand those people
so
it is it is enormously complex the
simple message
i think we should seek that in a way
but at the same time those who promote
it as though it encompasses everything
that matters um you know i think that
they're not adequately informed they're
not adequately informed all right if you
had 90 seconds to tell somebody who's
100 pounds overweight what they need to
do yeah to lose that weight yeah what
would you tell them so i think there's
two great strategies that i've seen be
very effective one is to go on a
packaged food diet one that is designed
for weight loss
so it's
giving you an adequacy of nutrients in
its design and it is a black box you're
only eating what's on the floor i see i
see it this somewhere that you can
actually get yeah there's medically
assisted weight loss facilities across
the united states that do this are there
not compliance problems actually i mean
once people get into a rhythm they do
quite well okay they do quite well
100 pounds is a lot i wouldn't
necessarily recommend that for people
that needed to lose that but that is at
a level
where the excess adiposity or body fat
is
really
health impairing
now
that's one strategy and it is effective
another strategy is a ketogenic diet
i've seen
people lose hundreds of pounds with
that style of diet and when i now that
i've explored the mechanisms more
i think it's my preferred
style because
you can actually have whole foods and
you can eat the fullness
and you can lose quite a bit of weight
but at the same side i mean i've
seen people that have gone onto that
diet and haven't lost much weight at all
but i think when you
if you can construct a diet that makes
it easier for the body to take in fewer
calories comfortably and there are more
ways to do it but if i'm trying to have
people lose 100 pounds the simplicity of
the keto diet is a great tool what do
you think about
cold exposure
heat exposure yeah does it have a role
in health longevity anything i think it
does
i don't exactly know its role but
the bigger window in which
cold and heat exposures fit into is
exposure to stressors
both cold and hot will elicit what are
considered heat shock and cold shock
proteins which are actually shot they're
called chaperone proteins and they do
multiple jobs within a cell
one they will find misfolded proteins
and they will magnetically bind to the
misfolding parts of the protein and can
sometimes move them back into a
conformation where those proteins now
remain effective it's like a key in the
lock
if they're too
broken then they will help to aggregate
those
proteins they bring them together and
they can deliver them to the lysosome
for
breakdown into
it's part of the autophagy process you
wear so autophagy vacuums up all of the
different broken down proteins and it
delivers them to the lysosome which then
is the incinerator
okay once it goes to the incinerator
these proteins that have gunked up and
are impairing the function of the cell
you now just have created new substrates
for new proteins to be built
and so
they can support health in that way
and so that's quite interesting and
it has neurological effects so there
seems to be some improvements in mood
it's very it actually is very similar to
the effects of exercise on the body uh i
interviewed a guy yari la khannan
and he's out of finland
so culturally people sauna there
regularly
and they have now been releasing paper
after paper it's a 20-year
cardiovascular study of 2000 men
and what they're looking at is how did
how do these men fare depending on a
variety of factors but in this case how
do they fare depending on their regular
usage of sauna exposure so men that
sauna four to seven times a week
compared to
men who only sauna once a week because
that's how common it is there
they will have
really a 65 reduction in their risk for
all forms of dementia
for myocardial infarction other forms of
cardiovascular disease and for
hypertension
it's all like 64 to 66 percent reduction
compared to men who saw it less
frequently and i think that those
effects are very similar to what you'd
see if those people didn't sauna but
just did exercise
so for me how that's changed as i've
been exposed to this information
i sort of think well i'm pretty tired
today so i'm not going to exercise i'm
going to sauna but it's i'm doing one or
the other and so i'm getting regular
exposure to that form of a stressor and
then every morning i take a cold shower
too
so
yeah really interesting and that your
talk on exercise is what made me think
about the cold and heat exposure because
and this is soft it's not like the
science-based cool stuff that you've
been giving us but there is something to
when you exercise every day you're
you're toughening your mind like you're
just practicing doing something hard and
so i'll say there's i take a cold shower
every morning there probably is
something i'll believe you that there's
something going on biologically yeah
but just
from uh i'm doing something hard every
day my psychology i can feel adjusting
my willingness to step into that cold
shower even though i don't want to
um and having to do something to my mind
to do it to either focus on this is my
identity it's who i want to be
these are the actions that i need to be
to be congruent with myself um you know
doing all of that stuff is incredibly
powerful um and and then because i've
practiced that when i get in front of
food that i don't want to eat it's the
same thing eating that would be a
violation of my identity which i've
spent every day either in the gym or in
the cold shower or both
sharpening so that i'm always living in
accordance with the things that i tell
myself about who i am yes
so i find that really really interesting
and i i do want to ask one quick
question about ghb
for anybody who thinks it sounds
familiar it is the compound that was
part of the date rape drug
but it has some pretty fascinating
effects and you said
if looking at this compound it seems
tailor-made to be effective against
alzheimer's yeah why is that and if
that's true why isn't anybody talking
about it
yes i'm i'm i'm conflicted with this
and let's get into it so
gamma ghb stands for gamma
hydroxybutyrate and i'll give you a
little bit of background
in the 90s you can get it from gnc say
what yeah you could really yep it was
available in every health food store it
wasn't regulated
and people would take it to sleep better
bodybuilders got word of it because
there's research behind it that it
actually will stimulate the release of
growth hormone oh great but it does so
because it elicits a form of sleep slow
wave sleep
that is when most of your growth hormone
is released ah but these italian
research just got researchers discovered
that it's also released even if it
doesn't cause sleep
so then bodybuilders started to take it
every couple of hours
and that frequency of exposure can cause
down regulation of the neural systems
that it's activating
and that can then develop a very serious
withdrawal syndrome
so
we had multiple lines of
stories that were developing around this
drug
one
it can get you very lean
and it helps with sleep
others start to be used in the capacity
for date rape but
that is a story unto itself rohypnol or
roofies
are a very long-acting benzodiazepine
drug and those can be slipped into a
drink and then somebody would have
retrograde amnesia which means they
couldn't remember the 15 hours before
that even happened that was heavily
banned ghb came ghb became the next
because it was broadly available it
became the next thing people that were
looking to do that used and it absorbed
a lot of the notoriety of rheumatol
but simultaneously narcoleptics had been
put on it to affect how their sleep
how awake they felt the next day and
another symptom that they have which is
called cataplexy which is a
loss of muscle tone
when they experience emotion
which is so weird yeah what yes it has
to do with the fact that
narcolepsy is narcoleptics are missing a
protein in their brain
and the circuitry with which that neural
system hypocretin is attached to happens
to
connect with our amygdala and emotion
and so when people were about to
tell a joke or the anticipation of
laughter
could make them go into a cataplectic
attack and they could have sagging of
their limbs or jaw or completely fall to
the ground it's a very interesting model
to understand sleep too because
you know a thousand a hundred years ago
you know you would do lesion studies
you'd like block out some part of the
brain and see what broke and it would
then you know this might be this part of
the brain might be important for this
function
well this happens naturally in
narcoleptics where
probably due to autoimmunity
this
group of cells is attacked so anyway
these people do not have a good therapy
for cataplexy and why is ghp so
interesting because most hypnotics will
put you to sleep they will prevent
deep sleep from occurring so they get
you to sleep faster and they might help
with sleep continuity but you're not
getting this deep deep sleep it can be
great in the short term
but it's
we're now discovering very problematic
if you take that chronically so things
like ambien and sonata
uh why is deep sleep important it is
during that time that physiological
state where we purge those neurotoxic
substances
and one of the two hallmark features of
alzheimer's disease is neurofibrillary
tangles and the accumulation of
beta-amyloid this gummy substances
substance that
accumulates when we use it with high
energy usage
and if we're not purging that then that
could gunk up the functioning of cells
so this vicious cycle ends up happening
where there's an area of the brain
called the medial prefrontal cortex that
area of the brain high energy usage
during the day and
it is also responsible for then
generating deep sleep at night
it's also part of the brain that ends up
accumulating beta amyloid first and so
your ability to purge that has
everything to do with how much slow wave
sleep that you get
and then this accumulates there
preventing slow wave sleep from
occurring so it's this feed forward
cycle and we used to think that poor
sleep was just a very common and early
symptom of alzheimer's disease but we
now know that it might actually be
directly involved in its pathogenesis
so
why is ghb good not only does it help
very uniquely generate the sleep the
type of sleep that's needed to purge
that and how much can we rescue somebody
that's already developed it well it
certainly might be preventative
but it also
because butyrates if you think ghb is
gamma hydroxybutyrate and we've been
talking a lot about beta hydroxybutyrate
those molecules are very very similar
and butyrates will actually turn on they
do what's called epigenetic modulation
to modification they will hurt they will
turn on genes that have been silenced
um
and so in the brain you'll see that a
brain protease called naprolisin is now
upregulated when you take ghb and that
can go to the beta amyloid and digest it
so
i mean perfectly uniquely suited and
there's one more thing
ghb can also be utilized
by
neurons as a fuel
it can enter directly into mitochondria
and one of the problems with
this whole system is as you start to the
mitochondria become impaired in their
ability to generate enough energy to
then satisfy all the cellular needs and
it's this downward spiral spiral because
the mitochondria can't maintain enough
energy production to mean cellular
integrity those cells turn into
senescence more inflammation more
disorder faster faster pathology
and so ghb can clear the clear the
proteins it can generate the sleep it
can also serve as a fuel to keep our
mitochondria functioning
you know a big part of my own phd thesis
focused on this and i think that the
argument is compelling i think that they
have a ethical
there's an ethical
uh consideration for them to pursue this
because we don't have good therapies for
alzheimer's disease wow man i'll be very
interested to see where that goes
dude you've got so much interesting
stuff tell these guys where they can
find you tell them how they can find
human os i think it's all amazing and
worth pursuing thank you
yeah so
humanos.me
we roll out
podcasts every week a newsletter we're
constantly creating little short courses
that are 20 minutes in length
we call them micro courses and we have
them all peer-reviewed we're constantly
rolling out how-to guides that just make
it easier workouts recipes so it's meant
to support your lifestyle in a variety
of ways so make you smarter over time
help to make today easier
and all of our thinking goes in there i
love that
all right what's one change people could
make that would have the biggest impact
on their health
boy
i probably should say something about
light
no what's the what's the truth or the
most interesting thing even i i
love the idea of fresh familiar fluent
be a positive force in your own
community
learn and i'll explain what i mean there
so this model that i've developed for
information we love the fresh that's
like the tweet that came out today it's
what's new
but we live in the familiar which means
we don't spend enough time understanding
something so that we can explain it to a
friend
we are not the only person in our lives
that is responsible for our health but
we have a huge responsibility we can't
outsource that it's not our doctor's
responsibility although they're a part
of our care team but we are too
so we need to up regulate our knowledge
and we need to
try test different things explore
different things but what i would say is
when you learn something
try to learn it well enough to explain
it to a friend so go to coffee have your
little health crew
whether it's family or friends go to
coffee with them go to t go for a walk
and try to explain something and you
might fail but that's an opportunity to
go back tighten up your learning then
try again
and that i think will
bring you to the place where you have
strong opinions held loosely because
you'll know why you think about
something until it's modified by new
info and i think you're much more likely
to be able to exploit
valuable information for your own
benefit when you get to that place
that makes total sense
all right guys
this is one of the more fascinating
people i've come across you're going to
definitely want to dive into this world
and check it out you will be richly
rewarded and i cannot thank you enough
for coming on the show thank you so much
great to be here if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
amazing dude thank you guys so much for
watching and being a part of this
community if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe you're going to get weekly
videos on building a growth mindset
cultivating grit and unlocking your full
potential